Document SAML APIs (#45105)
elastic/elasticsearch: x-pack/docs/en/rest-api/security/saml-authenticate-api.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[[security-api-saml-authenticate]]
=== SAML authenticate API

> Submits a SAML response message to {es} for consumption.

Reviewer: I think it's worth having the introductory _when using a custom web application other than Kibana_ sort of text in here in case people land on the page from a search result.

[[security-api-saml-authenticate-request]]
==== {api-request-title}

`POST /_security/saml/authenticate`

[[security-api-saml-authenticate-desc]]
==== {api-description-title}

The SAML response can be a response to a SAML authentication request that was
previously created using the

> <<security-api-saml-prepare-authentication, SAML prepare authentication API>>.

Reviewer: I find this sentence hard to parse (too many request / response terms, I think).
I don't have a suggestion right now, but since it's the first sentence in the body, it's probably worth trying to make it clear.

Author: I have no good alternatives either :/ The fact that we have two pairs of requests/responses we need to talk about here, doesn't help. I broke down the sentence a bit hoping this makes it clearer but I'm open to suggestions

It can also be an unsolicited SAML response in the case of an IdP-initiated
single sign-on (SSO) flow. After successful validation, {es} responds with an
{es} internal access token and refresh token that can be subsequently used for 

> authentication. This API endpoint basically exchanges SAML responses that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authentication. This API endpoint essentially exchanges SAML responses that
```

indicate successful authentication in the IdP for {es} access and refresh tokens,
which can be used for authentication against {es}.

{es} exposes all the necessary SAML related functionality via the SAML APIs.
These APIs are used internally by {kib} in order to provide SAML based
authentication, but can also be used by other, custom web applications or other
clients. See also
<<security-api-saml-prepare-authentication,SAML prepare authentication API>>,
<<security-api-saml-invalidate,SAML invalidate API>> and
<<security-api-saml-logout,SAML logout API>>.

[[security-api-saml-authenticate-request-body]]
==== {api-request-body-title}

`content`::

>   (string) The SAML response as it was sent by the user's browser, usually a

Reviewer 2: We should also indicate whether this property is Required or Optional, for example:

```suggestion
  (Required, string) The SAML response as it was sent by the user's browser, usually a
```

  Base64 encoded XML document.

`ids`::

>   (array) A json array with all the valid SAML Request Ids that the caller of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  (Required, array) A json array with all the valid SAML Request Ids that the caller of
```

  the API has for the current user.

[[security-api-saml-authenticate-response-body]]
==== {api-response-body-title}  

`access_token`::
  (string) The access token that was generated by {es}.
`username`::
  (string) The authenticated user's name.
`expires_in`::

>   The amount of time (in seconds) left until the token expires.

Reviewer 2: I wasn't sure what data type to put for this property. Integer?

[role="xpack"]
[[security-api-saml-authenticate]]
=== SAML authenticate API

> Submits a SAML response message to {es} for consumption when using a custom web application other than {kib}.

Author: we want something really high up to be a warning for users that if they want to configure SAML , they should not come here but go to our SAML Guide. They should only need to care about this API if they have a custom web application that they integrate with Elasticsearch and want to use SAML. 

I'm open to ideas on how to write this to be obvious :)

> Submits a SAML response message to {es} for consumption when using a custom web application other than {kib}.

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like this?:

```suggestion
Submits a SAML response message to {es}.

TIP: If you have a custom web application, you can use this API to authenticate against {es} with  SAML. It is also used internally by {kib}; see 
{stack-ov}/saml-kibana.html[Configuring SAML in {kib}].
```

> Submits a SAML response message to {es} for consumption when using a custom web application other than {kib}.

Author: >  you can use this API to authenticate against 

It's unfortunately a little more complicated than that. Both when kibana uses the APIs and in the case of a custom web app, the caller of the API would need to call both the `prepare` and the `authenticate` API in sequence , in order to authenticate. 

>  It is also used internally by {kib}; see {stack-ov}/saml-kibana.html[Configuring SAML in {kib}].

This also sounds like the kibana docs where we link them to , explain this API , or how kibana uses it, which is not the case. 

We don't want to document this API as a further detail on how Kibana works with Elasticsearch in order to provide SAML authentication for our users, but explicitly for custom web applications that want to take advantage of our SAML implementation in Elasticsearch. As such, it's a little more than a TIP here, it is the actual purpose of this API doc.

> Submits a SAML response message to {es} for consumption when using a custom web application other than {kib}.

Reviewer 2: Okay!  What about something like this:

```suggestion
Submits a SAML response message to {es}.  This API is intended for use by custom web applications.
```

> Submits a SAML response message to {es} for consumption when using a custom web application other than {kib}.

Author: I used this but in a `NOTE:` in the current version. I don't know if it's too much _shouting_ but one of the concerns we have had wrt documenting this APIs is that users will get mixed up and think they need to use this for SAML Authentication with our stack. So I'd rather err on the side of being too explicit about it :)

> If you are using {kib}, please see the {stack-ov}/saml-guide.html[SAML guide]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using {kib}, see the {stack-ov}/saml-guide.html[SAML guide].
```

[[security-api-saml-authenticate-request]]
==== {api-request-title}

`POST /_security/saml/authenticate`

[[security-api-saml-authenticate-desc]]
==== {api-description-title}

> 

Author: see above. I'm not sure if this is straightforward enough for users.

The SAML response message that is submitted can be:

> * a response to a SAML authentication request that was previously created using the

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's easier to parse if it's split into two sentences. For example, something like this:
```suggestion
* A response to a SAML authentication request. The response must be generated by the
```

Author: It's actually the authentication request that was generated, not the response. This does get too complicated :(

[role="xpack"]
[[security-api-saml-authenticate]]
=== SAML authenticate API

Submits a SAML `Response` message to {es} for consumption.

NOTE: This API is intended for use by custom web applications other than {kib}.

> If you are using {kib}, see the {stack-ov}/saml-guide.html[SAML guide].

Reviewer 2: When this PR is rebased against master, you'll see that this content is all now in the elasticsearch repo for use in the Elasticsearch Reference, so the URLs should change as follows:
```suggestion
If you are using {kib}, see the <<saml-guide>>.
```
